## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-17
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu

## Binary Search Tree (BST)

Left subtree contains only elements that are smaller than it, right subtree only elements that are larger than it

Depth -- steps back to the root

Height -- root to farthest leaf

Complete tree has all levels fully filled

Height of a complete tree is log2(n) [floor, if not an even power of 2]

Insert method -- find the optimal location and then plug in to the null 
pointer.
Weiss calls this a "contains" method.

Getting min means recursively (or with while loop) go left until null.
Max is the inverse.

Deletion is trickier. Removing leaves is easy, but interior nodes is harder.
 Must replace deleted interior node with one of its children, and it's 
 easier to just choose the direction you will pick from (Blaer chose left).

Biggest element in left subtree will always be a valid substitution. 
So FindMax on left subtree. But must recursively remove the new max 
in order to reshuffle the tree.

Lazy deletion - find seven, put a marker there to say that 7 has been 
deleted. Must modify all methods to handle deleted nodes. 

### Examine BinarySearchTree.java (from Weiss source)

Public insert does not return anything. But if the root node changes from 
null to having a value, then must return new root node, so call inner 
recursive insert method with current value of root.

FindMin is returning BinaryNodes, so the public findmin extracts element 
from the result of interior FindMin.

Blaer does not know if UnderflowException if part of the public java, so 
we must make our own UnderflowException if we want Weiss' code to compile. 
Make class that extends exception.

FindMin is implemented recursively, FindMax is implemented with a loop.

The remove method.If we remove the root, we must return new root, so must 
have interior recursive version of remove. 

Three cases:

1) If target node has no children, return t, because you want to make it null
2) If there is only one child, replace existing node with its only child 
  (ternary operator works because it either return right child or null)
3) 

When you replace t with something, the something brings all its children 
along for the ride.

If we don't have a balanced binary search tree, you might degenerate 
into a linked list, and then you get no order benefit. 
The best way to do this is to rebalance the tree when you insert or remove
something.

## Self-Balancing Tree 

AVL Tree - Addison-Velskey & Landis Self-Balancing Tree

Other type, Red-Black Tree (In chapter 10, not covered in class)

An AVL tree maintains two conditions at each node (rather than one). 
Binary search tree condition is upheld (left nodes less than right nodes).
Additional condition: height of left subtree must differ by no more than 1 from
the height of the right subtree.

Leaf node has height 0, null pointer has height -1.

AVL condition must be true at every node. (Even if root is okay.)

What to do in simple unbalanced case (three elements in a row on left):

Middle term must become the new root; this is a single rotation. Can think of
this like picking up tree at the middle node and letting it rebalance.

        a         b
       /         / \
      b   ->    c   a
     /
    c 

Single rotation does not work on a zig-zag tree, but double rotation does:

      a         a        c
     /         /        / \
    b   ->    c    ->  b   a
     \       /
      c     b


Assume X, Y, and Z are all subtrees with the same height:

        k2 
       / \  
      k1   Z  
     /  \
    X    Y

Now, insert to the left of the left (X+ is one height greater than X):

        k2 
       / \  
      k1   Z  
     /  \
    X+   Y

At k1 the AVL still holds, but no longer holds at k2 
(height of right subtree - height left subtree = 2)

AVL imbalance occurs at k2. Need to perform single rotation between the 
root node and its left child. (Trying to pick up the tree by k1.)

        k1 
       / \  
      X+  k2
          / \
         Y   Z 

Now want to insert into Y (right of the left):

        k2 
       / \  
      k1   Z  
     /  \
    X    Y+

Imbalance occurs at k2. Single rotation does not work:

        k1 
       / \  
      X  k2
          / \
         Y+  Z 

Double rotation occurs first between k1 and root of Y+ 
(changing names of subtrees):

        k2 
       / \  
      k1   D  
     /  \
    A    k3
        / \
       B   C

First rotation in double:

          k2 
         / \  
        k3   D  
       /  \
      k1    C
     /  \
    A    B

Second rotation in double:

          k3 
         / \  
        k1   k2  
       / \   / \
      A   B C   D

AVLs will definitely be on the midterm.
