## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-10
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu


## Answering questions about Homework 1:

For the Ractangle problem, can assume Rectangle dimensions are integers and can pass test rectangles as hard-coded

For Weiss problem 2.15, do not assume the integers in the array are positive -- can be negative or zero

For Weiss problem 2.7, for part a) give O() notation answer
For part b) give empirical answer

Weiss question 2.6: do not need to provide a proof

README in your zip should address implementation

## More Abstract Data Types

###Queue

FIFO. How to implement?

### Linked List (Singly or Doubly)

For example, Singly Linked List:

* Two operations, enqueue and dequeue
* If adding to front end, enqueue is O(1)
* Then remvoving must happen at back end and be O(n) (SLL has no tail node)

Doubly Linked List:

* Enqueue = O(1)
* Dequeue = O(1)

### Array

Front and tail pointers point to locations in array

When you add element, tail pointer moves over

When you remove element, head pointer moves over

If you run out of space, then wrap around to the front and use 
the space there

Use a size variable to keep track of stuff in the array, because you 
can't use indices to keep track of size anymore

>>> Now starting Chapter 4

###Trees

Have node r (root)

Root node will have some data in it and it is going to have 0 or more sub-trees hanging off of it

(T1, T2, T3)

No restrictions on how many children a node can have. Parent node is closer to root, child node hangs off its parent node.

Every node can be a root node of its own tree (thus most tree algorithms are recursive).

If a node is a final one (has no children) it can be called a "leaf" node. If a node (not the root) has children then it is an interior node.

Depth of the node == the length of the *unique* path from the node back to the root. Depth of the root node is 0. Can think of the depth as the number of links you have ot follow.

Height of a node == the *longest* path to a leaf. Leaf has a height of 0. Null pointer from a leaf has a height of -1.

Nodes on the same level with the same parent are siblings.

For a general tree, you don't know how many pointers you're going to need. But you can use lists to point to the next sibling and your first child:


    class TreeNode<AnyType> {

    AnyType data;

    TreeNode nextSibling;
    // nextSibling is the sibling after me whose parent is the same as mine
    TreeNode firstChild;
    // first child is the first node that is on a lower level to me


    }

If you don't have a next sibling or a child, pointers are null.

There is no way to go back (usually there is no parent pointer) because the algorithms are recursive, and when you exit a loop you are a level up.

Page 103 in textbook has visual representation of first child / next sibling declaration.

What does it mean to traverse a tree?

Preorder traversal: Work at a node is performed before its children are processed

Postorder traversal: Work at a node is performed after its children are processed

### Binary Tree

    class BTNode<AnyType>
    {
      AnyType element;
      BTNode left;
      BTNode right;
    }

Binary tree at each node can have 0, 1, or 2 children. You can think of a singly linked list as a degenerate binary tree. 

Full binary tree is one where all nodes have two children (except leaves).

Expression Tree:

The Operators are interior nodes, and operands are leaves.

Interior expression is sub-tree to main node.

Postfix expression: a b + c d e + * *

(Diagrams are on page 110 in textbook)

Push tree(A) and tree(B) onto stack

Get tree(+), pop tree(A) and tree(B), make child nodes of (+)

Push (+) tree back onto stack

node has three fields:

* first -- booleans for is operator or operand
* second -- store int value if operator
* third -- store char value if operand (with switch cases)

(A) and (B) not on stack

Push (C), (D), and (E) onto stack
See +
Pop (E), (D), create (+) node, push (+) onto stack
See *
Pop (+) and (C), create (*) node, push (*) onto stack
See *
Pop (*) and first (+), create (*) node, push new (*) onto stack

Same algorithm for evaluating postfix expression, but you're building tree 
instead of evaluating.

What you can do with an expression tree now that you've built them:

1) Evaluate them -- similar to how compilers work, with a syntax tree

2) Generate postfix expression


Evaluate tree recursively: solve left side, and solve right, and evaluate

Base case: left sub tree and right sub tree are null (you are an operand node)

Otherwise, recursively eveluate both sides, and apply operator to both sides

You should never have a case where node is an operand and has 
non-null children (this is an invalid expression tree)

    int evalET (ETN root)
    {
      //base case
      if(root.left==null&&root.right==null)
        return root.data;

      int leftOp = evalET(root.left);
      int rightOp = evalET(root.right);

      if (root.op == '+')
        return leftOp + rightOp;
      else if (root.op = '*')
        return leftOp * rightOp;
       ...etc

    }

Generating postfix expression:

Use postfix traversal strategy

Recursively call postfix print until you end up at an operand, then print 
left, right, and operator

To do infix print, you need parentheses, and you print left node, operator, and then right node.

### Binary Search Tree (BST)

Root node > elements in left subtree

Root node < elements in right subtree

Problem: tree is not necessarily balanced (left side may be less 
than right side, for example). The closer your tree is to complete, the more
optimal your search will be.

Inserts are basically the same as searches. (Every node must be unique)

Don't need to insert in order, insert more like how binary search works.

