## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-29
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu

## Heaps

### Insert and deleteMin methods

When we insert, tree must remain complete (insert into final, 
rightmost leaf spot)

No guarantee that this is the right spot, must percolate up the item

Deleting the min is constant time. But need to re-root the tree

IncreaseKey and Decrease key are ways to raise or lower a node's priority

Find location of that key, change key, and then re-percolate.


### Delete

Make the key less than the root, it becomes the root, and then deleteMin

Move thing to top - log(N)
Delete from top - log(N) (because you might have to percolte new root back down)

$2*log(n) --> log(n)$


### Build heap

Put all the items in (in no order). Start from first layer of non-leaf nodes 
and then percolate down for every level until everything is in the right place.

Percolate downs are O(logN) operations. The number of swaps is not equal to any 
more than the sum of the heights of all of the nodes. Tree has $2^{h+1} - 1$ nodes.

S = sum of paths for 0 to h

# nodes at each level = $2^{i}$

$/sigma{2^{i}*(h-i)}{0}{h}$, where i is your level

$S = h + 2(h-1) + 4(h-2) + ... + 2^{h-1}*(1)$

$2S = 2h + 4(h-1) + 8(h-2) + ... + 2*2^{h-1}$

$S - 2S = -h + 2 + 4 + ... + 2^{h-1} + 2^{h}$

$S - 2S = (2^{h+1} - 1) - (h + 1)$

Summation of all of the paths is on the order of 2^N, so need to perform 2^n 
log(n) operations, so O(N).


Sorting: Order N cost to build heap, N logN deleteMins to pop off all the 
elements, returns a sorted array.







