## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-31
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu

##Homework Notes - for #3

Make your spell check case insensitive, for both problems. For punctuation, 
strip off trailing punctuation (okay to strip trailing apostrophes). Otherwise, match against the dictionary 
directly.

Read the file in, throw the open file into a scanner. Use next line to jump 
through the dictionary (not the case for your file your're checking and not 
the case for the indexing)

Use string tokenizer class to pass, and use 'has more tokens' and 'next token'
-- like an iterator that steps through the string. Can get it to tokenize on 
delimiters 

Method of string has 'substring' so we could use substring, and if it's a special 
character we can strip it off. 

Submit the file you tested #1 on, but be aware it may be run on something else.

##Binary Heap

Looking at code for BinaryHeap.java from Weiss text.

Using array to keep track of the heap. 

Currentsize keeps track of where the last element is.

Initialize to capacity + 1 because we need the 0 spot empty. (Can't divide by 
0.)

Can also make an heap out of an existing array of items by making new 
array, iterating over it, and using buildHeap method.


## Special Purpose Sorting

What if my array has only 0s and 1s? You can just add up the array and then
print a sorted version.

Like a variant on bucket sort. You can do better if you know things about your 
data.

### General Purpose Sorting

Theoretical minimum is Nlog(N) when you don't know anything about you data.

Simple sorting algorithms, comparison based. More complicated like divide and
conquer.

Simple ones: $n^{2}$

Slower, but still somrtimes preferable.

## General Purpose Sorting

Want to be able to pass any kind of data, not only data with special 
properties.

### Selection Sort

Find minimum, put in the first spot. Find the minimum of what's left, put it in
the next location, etc.

Want to do it in a single array--swap first element with new min, then move
over and keep swapping.

[THIS WILL BE A QUESTION ON THE FINAL]

But if your element is already sorted, you have to check all the values anyway.

Comparisons: $n + n - 1 + n - 2 + ... + 1$

$\frac{n(n+1)}{2} = n^{2}/2 + n/2

Best case, worst case, and average case: $O(n^{2})$

Would like an algorithm than in the case of being given a sorted array degrades
into checking (order O(N)).

```java

    int[] ss(int[] a){

      for(int i=0; i < a.length; i++){
        int minsofar=i;

        for(int j = i+1; j < a.length; j++){
          if( a[minsofar] > a[j])
            minsofar = j;
        }
        int t = a[i];
        a[i] = a[minsofar];
        a[minsofar] = t;
      }
    }
```
###Insertion Sort

If it's given something sorted, we want it to do less work.

Consider list with a sorted section (left) and unsorted (right). Insert
elements into sorted section as we move right. (You can start at i==1.)

|547291 

5|47291 <- no move

45|7291 <- swap once

457|291 <- no move

2457|91 <- swap 3 times

24579|1 <- no move

124579| <- swap 5 times

Worst case: backwards, every node must be swapped O(n^{2}) times

Best case: already sorted, O(n)

Average: Still O(n^{2})

Still significantly better than selection sort, especially in local areas.

Weiss' sort.java has insertion sort in it.

###Merge Sort

```java

    int[] ms(int[] a){
      if(a.length <= i)
        return a;

      int[] a1 = ms(the first half of a) //you have to allocate a second 
      // array, copy it in, etc
      int[] a2 = ms(the second half of a) //etc

      [merge a1 and a2 into a new sorted array 
        using merge function]

      return merge(a1, a2);

    }
```

Function T() is the cost of running merge sort on an array.

$T(1) = 1$

$T(N) = 2 * T(N/2) + N$

$/frac{T(N)}{N} = /frac{T(N/2)}{N/2} + 1$

Sub in N/2 for N

$frac{T(N/2)}{N/2} = /frac{T(N/4)}{N/4} + 1$

...after log(N) times...

$/frac{T(2)}{2} = /frac{T(1)}{1} + 1$

Add them all up, and the terms cancel to:

$/frac{T(N)}{N} = 1 + log(N)$

$T(N) = N + Nlog(N)$

O(N) = Nlog(N) 

###Quicksort

Repeatedly partition the array. Hope to pick the median value, split the array
into bigger and smaller halves, and then recurse.

Randomly pick a value. If you pick the endpoint, you move 1, etc, you have
devolved into seletion sort. Therefore this is still worst case O(N^{2}).
But in the average case it's Nlog(N).

Unlike merge sort it can be done fairly easily in place and has a low constant
factor cost.

You could always pick the first one every time, unless you have a sorted array.
So instead pick the median of 3 -- first, last, and mid, and then take the mid.

How do we perform the partitions? It costs order N to make the paritions, which
is why the cost is Nlog(N) (assuming you're split exactly in half).

Start at both ends and increment in until you find items on the wrong side
(left is less than, right is greater) and then you swap them.

When your partitions cross, swap your pointer with whichever side your pivot
happens to be on.

Then call recursively on two partitions.

Read the chapter on disjoint sets before class on Tuesday!

Reading quicksort from Weiss' Sort.java

Uses an eternal for loop ( ; ; ) until break sends it out again.

