## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-12
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu

## AVL Binary Trees

Make an AVL:

4 2 6 1 3 5 7 16 15

       4
      /  \
    2     6
  /  \    / \
 1    3  5   7
              \
               16
              /
            15

Error condition at 7 node:

7
 \
  15
   \
    16

Becomes:

  15
 /  \
7    16 

AVL Tree code from Weiss: AvlTree.java

Blaer does not like the way Weiss builds tree heights, because they are not 
necessarily set by the rotation of the algorithm. 
(User can set left and right nodes.)

(Skipping splay trees, but we should read about them.)

### B-Trees

(Not going to code them, but we should know them)

Accessed by more than just greater/less than.

If there is empty space in your leaf, put the value in there. If you have five
elements in your leaf, then go one level up and split off a new leaf.

Purpose: may not always be able to read everything into memory, so you can 
just load a leaf.

### Hash Tables

Used for checksums, for example. Want creating a has function to be O(1). 
Locates where piece of data is stored in a table. Retrieving from indexed array
is O(1).

If array is size 0-9, mod your hash by 10, and you will jump to a location
in the table. But what do we do if we have a collision?

Code example on p173 in Weiss: figure 5.2, problem is if a word has the same 
letters, you get a collision.

Next code, figure 5.3: Multiply 1st 3 characters by a fixed number, then prefix
is a problem (uses character promotion to ints to get hash values as numbers)

How do we deal with conversions? Probing for another location you can 
put it in. Or you can hash to a linked list (inserting is O(1))

### Separate chaining

Insert is fast, but search time is affected by the size of the lists.

Looking at Weiss code for Separate Chaining (SC): SeparateChainingHashTable.java

Rehashing -- not as useful in SC, but critical in probing
Iterate through all elements in table and add to new LinkedList

Read chapters 5 and 6. Hw 3 will have problems on AVL trees.


