## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-07-24
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu

## Hashing -- Probing Methods

Probing -- if you have a collision, use probing formula to go to next 
location [h(1)], try and insert, if it is full, go to next location in 
probing formula [h(2)], etc. Same formula for searching. 

What happens if you run out of space? Lambda function (load factor)-- 
you want half the table filled, and no more. Grow the table when you go over 
the load factor (rehash).

How do you calculate h(x)? 

$h(x) = (hash(x) + f(x)) % tableSize$

f(x) is the probing function. f(0) = 0, so first location is the original 
hash of x.

### Linear Probing

$f(i) = i$. Try cells sequentailly and then wrap around to 
beginning of table.

You much keep your table size greater than 1/2 full (load factor) otherwise 
you start to get primary clustering and your probing is independent of 
previous probes.

Removing when dealing with serparate chaining -- whatever the size of your 
chain is is your order. Removing when you have probing -- you can do lazy 
deletion or you can rehash the table (or a combo of the two)

This means that at some point you will have an insert that triggers an O(n)
rehash, but all other operations should be O(1) as long as lambda is < 1/2.
You can amortize the cost of that one insert over all the inserts, so the 
average time is order 1.

Midterm clarification: If you have a perfect hash function with no collisions,
you have NO collision resolution strategies because there are NO collisions.
Therefore, it is always O(1) for a search or an insert.

(All hashing assumes unique keys, so there's no need to insert twice.)

### Quadratic Probing

$f(i) = i^{2}$. More commonly used algorithm. Allows us to jump around the 
table rather than just move linearly.

First probe after initial one is also 1: $f(1) = 1$. $f(2) = 4$, etc.

Insert list: 89, 18, 49, 58, 79

58: $58 % 10 = 8$; FULL. $58 % 10 + 1 = 9$; FULL. 
$58 % 10 + 2^{2} = 12 % 2 = 2$; SUCCESS;

0| 49
1|
2| 58
3| 79
4|
5|
6|
7|
8| 18
9| 89

There is a requirement that load factor <= int(tablesize)/2. Now that we are 
not going linearly, there is a likelihood that we jump around and get stuck
in a cycle and always jumping over the empty spaces.

Want to make sure that your series of h are all unique: size of table must be
prime and load factor < 0.5.

Proof of these two factors making insertion a success:

Table size is prime > 3

$i /= j$

If a collision occurs, $hash(x) + i^{2} = hash(x) + j^{2} (% tablesize)$

$i^{2} = j^{2} (% tablesize)$

$(i^2 - j^2) = 0 (% tablesize)$

$(i - j)(i + j) = 0 (% tablesize)$

One of the above terms must be 0 for this to be true. $(i - j)$ cannot be 0 
because i /= j.

For $(i + j) (% tablesize)$ to be true, i + j must add to something divisible
by tablesize. But we do not allow more than tablesize * 2 as the load factor,
so you cannot index twice, so the second term cannot happen either.

If load factor gets to 0.5, rehash the table to the next prime that is greater
than 2 * tablsize.

Looking at Weiss code: QuadraticProbingHashTable.java


Short circuiting and: if first result is true, must check second one. If 
first expression is false, don't check the second one. isActive method uses
this constructor. 

## Priority Queue

Also known as min-heap. Contains two operations, insert and deleteMin. 

Binary heap -- assume complete binary tree with N elements. The height is 
log(N). Looking for log(N) inserts and log(N) deleteMins.

Heap order condition: things at height = h must be less than items at 
height = h+1. Root is always the min, findMin in O(1).

Putting the binary tree in order in a simple array allows us to have no links.
For any element in array position i, the left child is in position 2i, 
the right child is in the cell after the left child (2i + 1), and the parent
 is in position ⌊i/2⌋. 

This is why you can't put anything in 0!

Must fill the tree (array) in from the left (just go one past the next thing 
in the array)

If your new element is less than its parent, swap them, then look again until
order condition is satisfied (percolating up).

DeleteMin: Delete the root. Then put the last thing (final leaf) into the 
root hole. If this swap is not valid, then percolate it down.

Swap it with its smallest child over and over until it no longer 
violates heap condition.

Should understand both graphically and array-based implementation of 
priority queues.

