## Data Structures in Java
### Notes for 2014-08-07
Monica Quaintance

mjq2102@columbia.edu



###GUI Info for Homework 5

AWT - abstract windowing toolkit
Action listners -- when an action occurs on that widget, the action listener 
finds that you pressed it. Interface, it includes action perform that tells
it what to do when the action is performed


###Djikstras Algorithm

Greedy algorithm, at each stage we want to do the best thing

Weighted graph, shortest-path algorithm, where you know your starting vertex

Djikstras will be on the final--going to give you graph, and you will have to 
crank through algorithm and show the shortest path

Remember to update the table with the cumulative weights, not just the cost at 
each stage; only update ones with a better cost

what if it looks like this?:

          v0
    (1) /   \ (2)
       v1    v2
    (5) \   / (1)
          v3

You never get stuck because you must settle every node.

"Known" means knows the shortest path to them (not "A" path)

Should check for loops and unconnected graphs

Djikstras pseudocode on p 379

loop of O(|v|), nested loop of O(|V), and loop of O(|E|): O(|V^2|+|E|)

If graph is dense, this is fine. If graph is sparse, this is bad!

So instead, use a priority queue, and use deleteMin for finding the next vertex

Use either decreaseKey or insert new value, prev vertex pair forevery update.
For the latter, make sure to check that vertex is not already known.

Priority queue: O(|V|log(|V|)+|E|log(|v|))
If sparse, then E ~ V, so O(|V|log(|V|))

If dense, then this is worse than O(|V|^2)

Does NOT work for negative edge costs!

###Disjoint Sets

Equivalence relations: A relation R is defined on a set S if for every pair of 
elements (a,b), a,b ∈ S, aRb is either true or false. If aRb is true, then 
we say that a is related to b.

An equivalence relation is a relation R that satisfies three properties:

1. (Reflexive) aRa, for all a ∈ S.
2. (Symmetric) aRb if and only if bRa.
3. (Transitive) aRb and bRc implies that aRc.

Find operation tell you what things are in the set.

e.g. if 3, 4, and 5 are all in the same set, find(3) = find(5)

Union puts two things in the same set (one has to be the root, but they 
are all the same)

You can just return the root as the name of a set.

Union(2,4) == Union(2,3) because find(4) = find(3)

You can't do Union(2,4) if 4 is added to the set of 3. But you can do 
Union(find(2),find(4)).

Deep trees cost a lot to do finds on--want to have shallow trees of sets

How can the tree tell how big it is, if the pointers only go from child 
to parent? You can make the tree point to -1 at the beginning and subtract -1 
for every child. Then you can always union onto the thing that has a higher 
negative header.

Union by height: pretty much guaranteed a log(N) depth

Path compression: happens on find(). When you go through a tree, set all 
things to point to the root.

Can just implment using two arrays, one for the identifiers, and one for 
content.

###Minimum Spanning Tree

Want minimum number of edges to ensure all nodes are connected. There cannot
be a cycle. Exactly one edge per node, n-1 edges. See p.394 in book.

####Kruskal's algorithm

Accepting or rejecting edges based on the need. Start by
selecting smallest edges possible. Accepting an edge has to NOT cause a cycle.

Vertices go into disjoint set, each vertex as a single set. When you add an
edge, you union the two vertices.

Code on page 399 in book.

If Blaer gave us an undirected graph on the final, make sure how you would 
accept edges in order and what the final min spanning tree would be.

####Prim's Algorithm

Looks like Djikstra's algorithm. Do NOT get them confused, Djikstra's keeps 
track of total distance and Prim's only does one edge.

###P vs NP

Deterministic polynomial time--algorithms that are p, that can be solved in 
some polynomial time of n

Nondeterministic polynomial time--could be solved in polynomial time, if you 
had an optimal guesser, but not without one.

In polynomial time you can go back and check to see if that is the right 
answer.

NP-complete problem has the hardest problems. Any problem in NP can be 
polynomially reduced to the NP-complete problem.

Hamiltonian Cycle -- simple cycle in which all the nodes in a graph are 
all in a single cycle.

Traveling Salesman Problem:

Given a complete graph G = (V, E), with edge costs, and an integer K, is 
there a simple cycle that visits all vertices and has total cost ≤ K?

How would you fake solving TSP? You could do Djikstra's algo starting at 
every node, or nearest neighbor, and come up with something close.

Swapping node pairs twice and checking to see if it's optimal- two-opting.
Opting all the way up is N-opting, and it's brute force.
